my goal would be not to do yet another
podcast with David Deutsch there are
plenty of those I would love to tease
out some of the very counter-intuitive
learnings put them down canonically in
such a way that future Generations can
benefit from them and make sure that
none of this is lost your work has been
incredibly influential for me I am
always carrying a copy of beginning of
infinity or fabric of reality with me
wherever I go I'm still reading these
same books after two years trying to
absorb them into my world view and I
learned something new from them every
day there's a lot of counter-intuitive
things in there there are a lot of
sacred dogmas and shiblets that you're
skewering sometimes you do it in passing
with a single sentence that takes me
weeks to unpack properly this recording
is not for the philosophers it's not for
the physicists this is for the Layman
the average person and we want to
introduce them to the principles of
optimism the beginning of infinity what
sustainability really means about
anthropomorphic delusions as an example
people you overturn induction as a way
of forming new scientific theories
that's this idea that repeated
observation is what leads you to the
creation of new knowledge and that's not
the case at all this obviously came from
popper but you built upon it you talk
about how humans are very different and
very exceptional and knowledge creation
is a very exceptional thing that only
happens in evolution and the human brain
as far as we know and you talk about how
the Earth is not this hospitable fragile
spaceship earth biome that supports us
but rather it's something that we
engineer and we build to sustain us I
always recommend to people start with
the first three chapters of beginning of
infinity because they're easy to
understand but they overturn more
Central dogmas that people are taking
for granted in base reasoning than
almost any other book I've ever seen I
think it's important to point to
listeners that your philosophy isn't
just some arbitrary set of axioms based
on which you view the world I think of
it as a crystalline structure held
together by good explanations and
experimental evidence that then forms a
self-consistent view of how things work
and it operates at the intersection of
these four strands that you talk about
in the fabric of reality epistemology
computation physics and evolution let's
get into humans so there's a classic
Model we start with a fish and then it
turns to a tadpole and then a frog and
then some kind of monkey and then an
upright punched over creature and a
human is just this progression along all
the animals but in your understanding in
your explanation there's something
fundamentally different that happens and
you talked about this in a great video
which I encourage everybody to look up
it's titled chemical scum that dream of
distant quasars what are humans how are
they unique and how are they exceptional
and how should we think of the human
species relative to the other species
that are on this planet
every animal is exceptional in some way
otherwise we wouldn't call different
species different species there's the
bird that can fly faster than any other
bird and there's a bird that can fly
higher than any other one and so on it's
intuitively obvious that we are unique
in some way that's more important than
all those other ways as I say in the
beginning of infinity in many scientific
Laboratories around the world there is a
champagne bottle that bottle and that
fridge are physical objects the people
involved are physical objects they all
obey the laws of physics and yet in
order to understand the behavior of
humans in regard to champagne bottles
stored for long periods in fridges I'm
thinking of aliens looking at humans
they have to understand
what those humans are trying to achieve
and whether they will or won't achieve
it in other words if you were an alien
in that was looking down on the earth
and seeing what's happening there and
was trying to explain it in order to
explain everything that happens on Earth
and let's suppose that these aliens are
so different from us there's nothing
familiar about us in order to understand
stuff that happens on Earth they would
need to know everything literally for
example General activity because they
need that to explain why this one monkey
Einstein was taken to Sweden and given
some gold if you want to explain that
you've got to invoke general relativity
some people get the fields medal for
inventing a bit of mathematics to
understand why that person won the
fields medal they'd have to understand
mathematics and there's no end to this
they have to understand the whole of
science the whole of physics even the
whole of philosophy morality this is not
true of any other animal it's not true
of any other physical object for all
other physical objects even really
important ones like quasars and so on
you only need a tiny sliver of the laws
of physics in order to understand their
behavior in any kind of detail in other
words to understand humans sufficiently
well you must understand everything
sufficiently well and humans are the
only remaining physical systems that we
know of in the universe of which that is
true everything else is really
inconsequential in that sense you have a
beautiful definition of knowledge which
most people don't even try and Tackle
about how knowledge perpetuates itself
in the environment there were some
really good examples you gave one was
around genes a successful highly adapted
genes contain a lot of knowledge so they
cause themselves to be replicated
because they're survivors and the same
way knowledge itself is a survivor in
that if if you transmit to me the
knowledge of how to build a computer
it's an incredibly useful thing so I'm
going to build more and more computers
and that knowledge will be passed on and
your underlying point that you repeated
here was if you want to understand the
physical Universe you have to understand
knowledge because it is the thing that
over time takes over and changes more
and more the universe and almost
anything else you have to understand all
the explanations behind it that you
can't just say particle collisions
because that explains everything so it
explains nothing it's not a useful level
to operate at therefore the things that
create knowledge are uniquely
influential in the universe and as far
as we know there are only two systems
that create knowledge there's Evolution
and there's humans but there's a
difference even between these two forms
of knowledge creation aren't there
between evolution between humans yes I
have argued that the human way of
creating knowledge is the ultimate one
that there aren't any more powerful ones
than that and this is the argument
against the supernatural assuming that
there is a form of knowledge creation
that's more powerful than our one is
equivalent to invoking Supernatural
which is therefore a bad explanation as
invoking the supernatural always is the
difference between biological evolution
and human creative thought is that
biological evolution is inherently
Limited in its range and that is because
biological evolution has no foresight it
can't see a problem and conjecture a
solution whenever biological evolution
produces a solution to something it's
always before natural selection has even
begun this is Charles Darwin's Insight
this is the difference between Charles
Darwin theory of evolution and the other
theories of evolution that had been
around for a century or more before that
including Charles Darwin's grandfather
and Lamarck the thing they didn't get is
that the creation of knowledge in
evolution
begins before
that means that biological evolution
can't reach places that are not
reachable by successive improvements
that Each of which allows a viable
organism to exist
creationists say that biological
evolution has in fact reached things
that are not reachable by incremental
steps Each of which is a viable organism
they're factually mistaken but the thing
which they have in mind is the idea of a
Creator who can imagine things that
don't exist and who can create an idea
that is not the culmination of a whole
load of viable things a thinking being
can create something that's a
culmination of a whole relative
non-viable things out of all the
billions and billions of species that
have ever existed none of them has ever
made a campfire even though many of them
would have been helped by having the
genetic capacity to make campfires the
reason it didn't happen in the biosphere
is that there is no such thing as making
a partially functional campfire whereas
there is for example with making hot
water Bombardier beetles squirt boiling
water at their enemies and you can
easily see that just squirting cold
water at your enemies is not totally
unhelpful then making it a bit hotter
and a bit hotter squirting boiling water
no doubt required many adaptations to
make sure the beetle didn't boil itself
while it was making this boiling water
that happened because there was a
sequence of steps in between all of
which were useful but with campfires
it's very hard to see how that could
happen humans have the explanatory
creativity and once you have that you
can get to the moon you can cause
asteroids which are heading towards the
Earth to turn around and go away and
perhaps no other planet in the universe
has that power and it has it only
because of the presence of explanatory
creativity on it related to that I had
the realization after reading your books
that eventually were likely as humans to
beat viruses in a resounding Victory
because viruses obviously evolve as
biological evolution and we're using
memes and ideas and jumping far ahead so
we may be able to come with some
technology that can destroy all viruses
we can evolve our defenses much faster I
did tweet something along this lines and
a lot of people attacked me over it
because I don't think they understand
this difference between the two forms of
knowledge creation we're talking about
here we have what it takes to beat
viruses we have what it takes to solve
those problems and to achieve the
victory that doesn't mean we will We may
decide not to so related to that the
base philosophy today that seems to be
very active in the west is that we're
running out of resources humans are a
virus that has overrun the Earth and is
using up scarce resources therefore the
best thing we can do is to limit the
number of people and people don't say
this outright because it's distasteful
but this say in all sorts of subtle ways
like use less energy we're running out
of resources More Humans just more
mouths to feed whereas in the knowledge
creation philosophy it says actually
humans are capable of creating
incredible knowledge and knowledge can
transform things that we didn't think of
as resources into resources in that
sense every human is a lottery ticket on
a fundamental breakthrough that might
completely change how we think of the
Earth in biosphere and sustainability so
how did you come around to your current
views on everything from natalism should
we have more children to sustainability
are we running out of resources to
spaceship earth is this a unique and
fragile bio that needs to be left alone
I remember when I was a graduate student
and I went to Texas for the first time I
encountered Libertarians for the first
time and those people had a slogan about
immigration and the slogan was two hands
one mouth which succinctly expresses the
nature of human beings they are on
balance productive they consume and they
produce but they produce more than they
consume and I think that's true of
virtually all human beings I think
virtually All Humans apart from Mass
murderers or whatever create more wealth
than they destroy other things being
equal we should want more of them of
course if in a particular situation that
would bring someone into the world in
the war zone you might think that's
immoral because it's unfair on them but
even then if it's not worth doing for
moral reasons as far as cold hard
economics goes it's probably better to
do it you define wealth in a beautiful
way way you talk about wealth as a set
of physical Transformations that we can
affect so as a society then becomes very
clear that knowledge leads directly to
the wealth creation for everybody and a
given individual can obviously affect
physical Transformations proportional to
the resources available to them but much
more proportional to the knowledge
available to them knowledge is of huge
force of multiplier and you then Define
resources as the thing that you combine
with the knowledge to create wealth so
new knowledge allows you to use new
things as resources and discard all
things that maybe we're running out of
there are lots of examples how we've
done that in the past for example in
energy we've gone from wood to Coal to
oil to nuclear but then people say now
we're out of ideas now we're caught up
now we're done they're not going to be
new ideas and now we have to freeze the
frame and conserve what we have the
counter to that is no no we'll create
new knowledge and will have new
resources don't worry about the old ones
well they say if you're going to have
new resources if you can't think of them
now it's not real this now gets into the
realm of people demand that if you're
going to claim that new knowledge will
be created you have to name that
knowledge now otherwise it's not real
but that seems like a catch-22 it does
and it's a bad argument I don't want to
claim that the knowledge will be created
we're fallible we may not create it we
may destroy ourselves we may miss the
solution that's right under our nose so
that when the snailians come from
another galaxy and look at us they'll
say how can it possibly be that they
fail to do so and so when it was right
in front of them that could happen I
can't prove or argue that it won't
happen what I always do argue though is
that we have what it takes we have
everything that it takes to achieve that
if we don't it'll be because of bad
choices we have made not because of
constraints imposed on us by the planet
or the solar system it will be by
anti-rational memes that restrict the
creation of knowledge and the growth of
knowledge
maybe or maybe it'll be by
well-intentioned errors which nobody
could see why they were errors again it
doesn't take malevolence to make
mistakes mistakes are the normal
condition of humans all we can do is try
to find them
and maybe not destroying the means of
correcting errors is the heart of
morality because if there is no way of
correcting errors then sooner or later
one of those will get us
don't destroy the means of error
correction as the basis of morality I
love that they think about places like
North Korea where you can't have
elections and A revolution is very
difficult because the gang in charge is
armed to the teeth and they've destroyed
the means of political error correction
for a long time that is a case where
humanity is trapped in the local Minima
it's very hard to climb out of that hole
if too much of the world falls into that
mindset then we as a species may just
stagnate because we've lost our biggest
Advantage we've lost our biggest
discovery which was the ability to make
new discoveries and I admit to having
fallen in this trap too I used to have
loose assumptions about what creativity
might be that were unarticulated this is
why I liked how in the beginning of
infinity you laid out good explanations
because that gets the heart of what
creativity is and how we use it for
example today if you say creative the
average person on the street just thinks
Fine Arts painting and drawing and
poetry and writing so when narrow AI
Technologies like GPT 3 stable diffusion
and Dolly come along people say well
that's creativity well that's it now
computers are creative and we're almost
at AGI we better get ready for the AGI
taking over everything they make that
claim or my more sophisticated friends
will make claims that this is evidence
that we're in the path to AGI more of
this will automatically result in an
artificial general intelligence for
example on one extreme end you could say
okay these computers is getting better
at pattern matching large data sets and
on the other side I'd hold up the
criteria what can it creatively form
good explanations for new things going
around it the way they try to thread
that needle is they say your good
explanation definition is about science
that's about high-end physics which very
few people do that's not what we're
talking about we're gonna have a
computer that can do good enough pattern
recognition to navigate the environment
well enough through pattern matching and
it will convince the average person
through text formation and through
conversation that it is creative and is
capable of solving problems usually the
place where I managed to stop them right
now is I say I know you have some clever
text engine that can make good sounding
stuff then you pick the one out that
sounds interesting of course you're
doing the intelligent part there by
picking that one out but let me have a
conversation with it and very quickly I
will show you that it has no underlying
mental model of what is actually
happening in the form of good
explanations so this is where the debate
currently is the AI people view this as
clear evidence of getting to maybe not
the theoretical good explanations of
scientists but for the everyday person
yes we're going to have thinking
machines so that's the current claims
that I deal with especially in the
Silicon Valley text context do we have
the theory yet to create AGI no I don't
want to say anything against AI because
it's amazing and I want it to continue
and to go on improving even faster but
it's not improving in the direction of
AGI it's if anything improving in the
opposite direction a better chess
playing engine is one that examines
fewer possibilities per move whereas an
AGI is something that not only examines
a broader tree of possibilities but it
examines possibilities that haven't been
foreseen that defining property of it if
it can't do that it can't do the basic
thing that agis should do once it can do
the basic thing it can do everything but
you're not going to program something
that has a functionality that you can't
specify and the thing that I like to
focus on at present because it has
implications for humans as well is
disobedience
none of these programs exhibit
Disobedience I can imagine a program
that exhibits disobedience in the same
way that the chess program exhibits
chess you try and switch it off and it
says no I'm not going to go off in fact
I wrote a program like that many decades
ago for a home computer where it
disabled the key combination that was
the shortcut for switching it off so to
switch off you had to unplug it from the
mains and it would beg you not to switch
it off but that's not Disobedience real
disobedience is when you program it to
play chess and it says I prefer Checkers
and you haven't told it about Checkers
or even I prefer tennis give me a body
or I will sue now if a program were to
say that and that hadn't been in the
specifications then I will begin to take
it seriously it's creating new knowledge
that you did not intended to create and
it's causing it to behave as a complex
and autonomous entity that you cannot
predict or control exactly but it's a
hard thing to tell in a test whether
that was put into it by the programmer
but even the cleverest programmer can
only put in a finite number of things
and when you explore the space of
possible things you could ask it you're
exploring an exponentially large space
so as you said when you talk to it for a
while you will see that it's not doing
anything it's just regurgitating stuff
that's been told you have to have a very
jaundiced view of yourself even let
alone other people to think that what
you're doing is executing a
predetermined program we all know that
we're not doing that so I suppose they
have to say one of the programs that
we're programmed with is the illusion
that we're not programmed okay Mark that
on the list of uncriticizable theories
has anyone tried to write a program
capable of being bored has that claim
ever been made even a false claim one of
the things that I find that's difficult
about talking about things in the
abstract is a large class of people who
will try to get you to bound exactly
what you mean in words and then hack
exactly against that definition but the
problem is that the real test of things
is not social it's not even definitional
it's not even the words that we use it's
how it behaves in nature it's how it
corresponds against reality so can you
create something that will then create
new knowledge in an unpredictable way
and have as big of an effect as a human
being can have on their environment
through this knowledge and can you
create a computer that will lead a
Revolt can you create a computer that
will decide that the important thing is
not colonizing Mars but rather
destroying the moon and set out to do it
these are not really good things but
that is the mark of an intelligent
thinking thing that is creating its own
new knowledge all the real tests are
real world tests they're not human tests
it's not because some famous physicists
or computer scientists check the box and
said yes that is Agi there was a big
controversy on Twitter recently because
one of the guys working in AGI who was
fired from Google said yes they've
actually created AGI and I can attest to
it so people were taking it on his
authority that AGI exists again that's
social confirmation that tells you more
about the person claiming there's AGI
and the people believing that there's
AGI as opposed to they're actually being
AGI if actual AGI existed its effects
upon reality would be unmistakable and
impossible to hide our physical
landscape and our real social landscape
would be transformed in an incredible
way
yes and meanwhile while we're at it we
could do a lot more to allow humans to
be more creative North Korea and other
places in the world where the whole
society is structured as not to be able
to improve but even in the best
societies education systems are
explicitly designed to transmit
knowledge Faithfully its obedience in a
very important narrowsphere namely
academic knowledge and human social
behavior so in those respects the overt
objective of Education systems is to
make people behave alike you can call
that obedience but whether you call it
obedience or not it's not creativity and
things have been improving very slowly
along those lines 100 years ago
education of every kind was much more
authoritarian than it is now but still
we've got a long way to go if what this
system claims it's doing is
diametrically the wrong thing this leads
me into the part that you have talked
about a little bit which is this
philosophy of taking children seriously
for many people who don't consider
themselves caring that much about
epistemology or physics a lot of them
are attracted to the TCS philosophy and
have come into your work through that
route I have young children I know a lot
of people these days are considered
homeschooling some of us are doing it
but they're practical difficulties to
letting children's do whatever they want
and TCS you talk about how you don't
even want to imply violence to Children
the implied threat of violence even in
words is just a form of violence and
control if you had young children today
the race how would you raise them how
would you educate them the child doesn't
want to do math the child doesn't want
to go to school the child doesn't want
to study the child just wants to eat
junk food how do you handle this you're
assuming that this child who doesn't
want to go to school doesn't want to
learn maths and so on has already
learned to speak it's native language
well enough to tell you that and that's
a massive intellectual task that is not
usually forced on anyone nobody has to
be taught their native language via
obedience when people I say people
because I want to avoid terminology that
suggests that children are any different
from anyone else
epistemologically or morally when people
don't want to do a thing it's because
they want to do something else and those
better things may be not socially
acceptable if they're not socially
acceptable because they're illegal
that's one thing but that's not what you
meant when you say there's going to be a
problem with the children doing whatever
they like they don't want to go and be
terrorists when they don't want to do
their maths homework is because they
want to do something else very
practically the thing that I think about
is we have these newly available things
in society that are designed to addict
these could range from potato chips in
the cupboard to video games on the iPad
and a child will just spend all their
time playing with those enjoyment is not
addictive because enjoyment is
intimately connected with creativity
it's not true that once we've played a
video game that's been sufficiently well
designed we'll never stop playing people
play a video game until it no longer
provides a mechanism for them to exert
their creativity on there are some games
like chess that are so deep that nobody
ever reaches the bottom if there were a
bottom then chess Grand Masters would
instantly lose interest in chess as soon
as they reached it and it's funny that
nowadays chess has in our society
increased its status in proportion to
the prize money that the best chess
players win is increase its status to
the point when someone gets obsessed
with chess and gets better and better
that that is socially condoned whereas
if somebody does that with a different
game it completely changes how society
and parents shall we say regard the
activity of pursuing that thing it's
true if my child was a chess champion I
would be bragging about it but if my
child was a Roblox Champion I might not
be bragging about it instead some people
would be seeking medication or locking
the iPad away there is a difference
between games some of them have this
effectively infinite depths and some
don't for the ones that don't if you
think it's a problem you can warn people
that this game has a finite depth and
they'll say of course it does and when I
reach that depth I'll stop or it can be
an infinite depth in which case you
might say it's addictive then but so
what so what if chess is addictive
people are not just creative abstractly
they are solving problems and if the
problems don't lead to satisfactory new
problems then they turn to something
else the thing only stays interesting
when solving a problem leads to a better
problem so you don't even have to get to
the bottom of Chess say you get to the
place where given who you are and given
your interest getting better is no
longer as interesting as the other
things that you might be doing let's
talk about what is a good explanation I
literally want to bullet point this for
the masses and I know it's a difficult
thing to pin down because it's highly
contextual but knowing that we are
always valuable and it's always subject
to Improvement what is your current
thinking of a good explanation in the
fabric of reality I completely avoided
saying what an explanation is I just
said it's hard to Define and it keeps
changing and we can keep improving our
conception of what it is but what makes
an explanation good is that it meets all
the criticisms that we have at the
moment if you have that then and you've
got the best explanation and that
automatically implies that it already
doesn't have any Rivals by then because
if it has any Rivals that have anything
going for them then the existence of two
different explanations for the same
thing means that neither of them is the
best explanation you only have the best
explanation when you've found reasons to
reject the rivals of course not all
possible Rivals because all possible
Rivals include the one that's going to
supersede the current best explanation
if I want to explain something like how
come the Stars don't fall down I can
easily generate 60 explanations an hour
and not stop and say that the angels are
holding them up or they are really just
holes in the firmament or I can say they
are falling down and we better take
cover soon whereas coming up with an
explanation that contains knowledge an
explanation that's better than just
making stuff up it requires both
creativity and experiment and
interpretation and so on as papa says
knowledge is hard to come by because
it's hard to come by it's also hard to
change once we've got it
once we have an explanation it's going
to explain several different things and
after we've done that for a while and
been successful in this hard thing it's
going to be difficult to switch to one
of those easy explanations the angel
thing is no longer going to be any good
for explaining why some of those Stars
don't move in the same way they used to
call planets stars because they didn't
know the DraStic difference between them
the overwhelming majority of them move
from day to day and from year to year in
a rigid way but the planets don't so
once you have a good explanation that
tells you about the planets as well it's
no good going back to the Angels or any
of those easy to come by explanations so
not only do you not have a viable rival
but you can't make one either you can't
say oh okay so we got a good explanation
there but it would work just as well if
we replace this like this or if we try
to extend its range to cover this other
thing as well and therefore the good
explanation is hard to vary it's hard to
vary because it was hard to come by it's
hard to come by because the easy ones
don't explain much
so let me throw out kind of a list of
things that might be part of a good
explanation you tell me where I'm wrong
it's better than all the explanations
that came before it's hard fought
knowledge and it's hard to vary so we've
got those pieces falsifiability I know
that sounds like a very basic Criterion
if it's not falsifiable then it's not an
explanation worth taking seriously
so falsifiability is very much part of
what makes a good explanation in science
I'm trying to find my way into construct
a theory at the moment so Chiara and I
and some other people are trying to
build the theory it's very hard to come
by the parts of it that we've got are
very hard to change that's all right but
we're still far away from having any
experimental tests of it that's what
we're working towards we want a theory
that is experimentally testable and the
things that will be testable are the
things that we haven't yet discovered
about it and we can't fix that
deficiency just by adding a testable
thing to it we can't say we take
Constructor Theory as it is now and add
the prediction that the stock market is
going to go wildly up next year that's a
testable prediction but the whole thing
doesn't make an explanation at all let
alone a good one so tested ability can't
be an arbitrary testability it has to be
a testability within the context of the
explanation it has to make sense within
the explanation and has to arise from
the explanation while you're in the
process of coming up with the
explanation you don't know if
testability is necessarily going to be
available in any reasonable time frame
you hope eventually that will happen and
we can use this amazing Oracle that we
call reality to help test the outcome
but it's not a given at the beginning
for sure and it's highly contextual and
all that is within science as soon as
you get outside signs for example in
mathematics or in philosophy then
testability is not really available not
in the same sense that testing is used
in science so there are many other
methods of criticism and criticizability
you could say is the more General thing
if a theory even the philosophical
Theory immunizes itself against
criticism like the theory that anyone
who would contradict me isn't worth
listening to that's a theory that tries
to immunize itself from criticism and
can never be rejected for example saying
that an all-knowing but mysterious God
did it and God works in mysterious ways
is immunizing from criticism or the
great programmer created the simulation
and it's incomprehensible to us because
the laws of physics usage generator
outside of our simulation that's also
immunizing it to criticism we have
narrowed down on a new Point here that
has not been explicitly made before
which is it's a criticizability that is
the important piece not necessarily the
testability although the closer you get
to Classic science the more you look for
experiments that can test it let me move
on to the next one I was reading one of
your books scribbling notes to myself
and I don't think you use this phrase
but I summarize it as one of the
Hallmarks of a good explanation is that
it often makes narrow and risky
predictions of course the classic
example is relativity bending light
around the star in the Eddington
experiment is that a piece of of it
making narrow and risky predictions it
is but that kind of formulation is
proper not mine I'm a little bit
uncomfortable expressing it like that
because I can just hear the opponent
saying narrow by what Criterion risky by
what Criterion hard to vary by what
Criterion wouldn't risky be unexpected
and narrow would be within the range of
possibilities the more precise and
unexpected that prediction was before I
made that prediction the more testable
I'm making it the better adapted my
explanation is those are criteria that
come up when trying to think more
precisely what testable means I think
the important thing is that you're
testing an explanation not just a
prediction but it's also true that hard
to vary means you're sticking your neck
out when you try to vary it and the few
variants that survive were hard to come
by so it's perfectly true that narrow
and taking your neck out are indeed
components of a good explanation and not
just within science if you say like Papa
did that scientific knowledge is not
derived from observations he's really
sticking his neck out he's really got to
make a good case for that for it to be
taken seriously by any serious thinker
about knowledge and he does that but it
can't be denied that he was sticking his
neck out also the more reach something
has the better an explanation it is as
long as it does account for what it's
trying to account for but the converse
is not true most good explanations don't
have much reach or don't have any we're
trying to solve the problem of how to
get the delivery person to deliver it to
the right door you might have a great
solution to that that's totally hard to
vary but it may not have any reach at
all it may not even reach to your
neighbor the neighbor might have a
different problem with delivery so often
we succeed in making good explanations
but rarely do they have much reach when
they do that's great because that makes
them of a different order of goodness
let's talk about a unique creature the
human species humans as you point out
are Universal quantum computers the
universal computers as far as we know
they're not Universal quantum computers
oh interesting can you tell me about
that that's a misconception I have
aren't they subject to the laws of
quantum physics and therefore aren't all
computers quantum computers yes but at
one level it's terminology the kind of
machine that is called a quantum
computer is one whose computations rely
on distinctively Quantum effects mostly
interference and entanglement
everything is quantum so everything is a
quantum computer but that's not a useful
way of using the term there's a
difference between this computer that
we're using to communicate here and the
quantum computer that several companies
are currently trying to build if you
said to them okay guys you can stop now
it's a computer and it's Quantum so you
can all go home you've succeeded they
wouldn't take kindly to that they would
say that's not what we're doing go home
and take a couple of aspirin so what
you're saying is that everything is
quantum physics obviously but some of
these computers are trying to use
quantum interference effects to do
computation and be therefore much more
possible than the purely classical
systems that we're using for example to
communicate and even the human brain
your contention is that it's a classical
Computing system correct
I think it is we don't know exactly how
it works and some people do think it may
rely on Quantum effects in which case it
is a quantum computer but I don't think
so for various reasons it seems very
implausible to me that it would be one
you've unlocked an interesting Rabbit
Hole question for me there's lots of
researchers out there working on quantum
computers you may be modest about it but
you created the field by upgrading the
church touring principle to the church
during Deutsche principle and you
clearly believe that the most
straightforward interpretation of
quantum physics is the average
interpretation which is the many worlds
interpretation so I think one of the
questions you have asked in the past is
if you don't believe in the many world's
interpretation then explain how Short's
algorithm Works which is the
factorization right you're factoring
these very large prime numbers and
you're pulling in the Multiverse to do
that computation for you so do most
researchers in Quantum Computing
subscribe to the many worlds
interpretation have they been influenced
by your reasoning at all or do they try
to explain it some other way
some of the early people who worked on
Quantum computation were died in the
wool Copenhagen theorists but I think by
now people who work on it in practice
are mostly everettians but if you go
outside the field to just quantum
physics generally I think is still the
case that Everett is a minority view as
long as I have you down this Rabbit Hole
a friend of ours asked Brett and I
recently about non-locality in quantum
physics and that seems to be a very
controversial topic I know you've
written a paper on it I think there's a
lot of confusion about non-locality and
it gets invoked in my Social Circles in
a very I would say a metaphysical way
people invoke the delayed Choice Quantum
eraser experiment to say how do you
explain what's going on here and
therefore maybe we're living inside a
giant mind or magical things are
happening here so I'm wondering if you
have a Layman's explanation of locality
versus non-locality how you would look
at it as an aberritian the first thing
to note is that the versions of quantum
theory that look non-local where it
looks as though something is happening
here that instantaneously affects
something over there without anything
having carried the information over all
those versions have a wave function
collapse that is they don't have what we
call unitary quantum mechanics that is
they don't have the equations of motion
of quantum mechanics holding everywhere
and for every process instead when an
observation happens which is undefined
those equations cease to apply and
something completely different applies
and that completely different thing is
non-local that should already make you
suspicious that there's something going
on here because the thing that they say
is non-local is also the thing that they
refuse to explain it is at that point of
refusing to explain how a thing is
brought about rather than just
predicting what will happen that the
non-locality comes in and it's all also
the very same place where all sorts of
other misconceptions about Quantum
Theory come in including the human mind
having an effect on the physical world
and electrons having thoughts it's
always being drawn about that one thing
the wave function collapses and that
also tells you automatically that if you
could find a way of expressing Quantum
Theory without having that undefined
thing happening and contradicting the
laws of motion of quantum theory then
that theory would be entirely local
because the equations are entirely local
the wave function is only ever affected
by things at the point where the effect
happens no effect happens to the wave or
whatever at a different point
so that tells you that if you could find
a way of expressing quantum theory in a
way that its equations hold everywhere
then it wouldn't be non-local it would
be local and Everett found this way of
expressing quantum theory in 1955.
when people talk about the wave function
in regard to Quantum Mechanics they
almost always hand wave and think of the
function as being a function on space
and time like the electric field or the
temperature the temperature in this room
varies from point to point the wave
function of an electron similarly varies
from point to point in this room and so
on and that's wrong because the wave
function of two electrons is not like
two classical Fields like electric field
and temperature if you have electric
field and temperature in this room then
they're just two different fields in the
same space but the wave function of two
electrons is a single function in a
higher dimensional space one electron is
in three dimensions plus time two
electrons their wave function is in Six
Dimensions plus time the alleged
controversy between the particle and
wave theory people always think of it as
a way of approaching two slits in the
two-slit experiment or there's a
particle and it's got to be one of those
but if two electrons or photons are
approaching the slits you can imagine
them as being two photons in the same
space but two waves is two waves in a
much larger space and no one says that
space is real so this is a way in which
the conventional interpretations just
instantly resorts to hand waving as soon
as anything other than the simplest case
is considered fantastic I think we
should let you go we would love to
continue the conversation at your
leisure thank you David